AWS RDS offers a wide range of database instance classes for higher performance,
including our familiar M class memory optimized instances,
and T family burstable instances.
Of course, you can elastically scale your instance
up and down as needed to improve performance.
You can start small and grow based on your workload.
Using CloudWatch to monitor your database resources and based on the metrics you capture,
you can test and scale accordingly.
RDS also takes advantage of AWS Elastic Block Storage or EBS,
for exceptional read-write performance.
You have the same SSD or HDD options with
general SSD or provision IOPS SSD or magnetic hard drive storage.
But we aren't going to consider the magnetic option in a performance discussion.
We're going to assume design for optimal performance and cost.
So we'll assume the use of EBS solid state drives.
We have general purpose SSD,
which is the default general SSD drive with linear scaling and burstability.
We also have provisioned IOPS SSD,
which is fast, predictable,
and consistent when you need fast and consistent I/O.
Provision IOPS SSDs are also more costly,
so you pay for the increased performance.
Database backups and maintenance windows affect database performance.
While your database will still be fully available,
I/O will increase, and that may have an effect on performance and production.
Of course, this is something you can predict and prepare for.
AWS RDS provides automated read replicas for all databases,
except for Oracle and SQL Server.
These read replicas scale out read performance by
replicating all changes made on the master databases to read replicas.
Read replicas are fully managed service,
and to reduce cost associated with cross availability zone traffic,
you should configure the Multi-AZ feature
to specify where the read replicas should reside.
In addition to CloudWatch and the metrics that
can be monitored and alerted on in that service,
AWS now offers a service called RDS Performance Insights.
A database performance tuning and monitoring feature,
you enable in the RDS console that helps you quickly assess
the load on your database and determine when and where to take action.
The output from performance insights is displayed on the Performance Insights dashboard.
This feature isn't overly technical or complicated,
and the dashboard makes the database load easy to understand and interpret,
suitable for the experienced DBA and the IT generalist.
For example, when the load is high,
it is easy to identify the bottleneck,
be it CPU consumption or a misbehaving SQL statement.